---
title: General introduction to Machine Learning
---

In this lesson, we'll learn the basics about Machine Learning (ML).


### Machine Leaning

Machine Learning is a subfield of AI. Machine learning is a process that uses an algorithm to analyze data, learn from the data and make a statement or prediction about it. Unlike software, which was programmed by hand and performed tasks by specific instructions, the machine is trained using large amounts of data and algorithms. This allows her to learn how to perform a task.

The algorithms had been evolved in recent years to include:
- decision trees
- induced logic programs
- clustering
- reinforcement learning
- Bayesian networks
- ...

But none reached the goal of "Artificial General Intelligence" and even “Artificial Narrow Intelligence” was difficult to achieve with early machine learning approaches.

It turned out that one of the best areas of application for machine learning was the Computer Vision program. However, a lot of manual programming was required for the machine learning to work. Data Scientists wrote classifiers like Edge Detection Filters. The program could now figure out where objects began and where they ended, recognize the shape of an object, and recognize the letters STOP. From this, an algorithm was developed that recognized images and learned what a stop sign is. That's a good idea, but on days when it was very foggy, for example, or trees partially covered the sign, the algorithm was rarely able to identify the sign.

