---
title: General introduction to Computer Vision
---

In this lesson, we'll learn the basics about Computer Vision (CV).


### Computer Vision

This section introduces the basic techniques of image-based recognition. Under the computer-aided recognition of images, or Computer Vision, one understands various techniques to locate elements in images or identify and catalog videos. The goal is to use an automated process to gain a visual understanding while distinguishing between relevant and less distinguish relevant information. This is a complex process that otherwise reserved only for the human visual system, part of the nervous system.

Today it is common to train image recognition models, which take an image as a received input and output one or more objects and possibly more recognize attributes. The various objects possible to recognize are in classes assigned. Examples of these images must first be stored in so-called image databases collected. In addition to the class prediction these image recognition models also provide an assessment of the accuracy of the prediction meet. This value can be understood as a kind of probability of prediction and describes how confident the model is that an image becomes a learned class can be assigned.

In general, the recognition systems distinguish between single and multiple recognition. With a single detection, the model says only one class as Prediction for the entire image. Models designed for multiple detection were able to recognize several objects of different classes in one image.
Consequently, information on the localization of the object in the image and confidence needed.

In the [next lecture](../2.ComputerVision/index.md), we will have a more in dept view, into the details of CV. 
