---
title: Deep Learning
desc: General introduction to Deep Learning
---

In this lesson, we'll learn the basics about Deep Learning (DL).


# Introduction

Artificial neural networks are inspired by the biology and workings of our brain. But unlike the brain, where neurons can connect to any neuron within a given physical distance, the neural network can only do so through separate layers, connections, and directions of data propagation.

For example, take a picture and cut it up into a bunch of pieces. These are recorded in the first level of the neural network. In this first level, individual neurons pass the data to the second level. In the second level, this process is repeated until a final result is produced.

Each neuron assigns a score to its input, whether this is correct or incorrect depends largely on the task to be performed. The final result is then determined by the overall ratings. Think back to the stop sign example. Properties of a stop sign image are sliced ​​up and checked by different neurons - the octagonal shape, the red color, the prominent letters, the size. The job of the neurons is to figure out if it's a stop sign or not. The neural network outputs a probability vector based on the scores. In the stop sign example, the system might conclude that it is 86 percent a stop sign, 7 percent a speedometer, five percent an object stuck in the tree and so on. The network architect then gives the system feedback on what is correct and what is not.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!History part needds to be changed!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!Neural networks have been around since the early days of AI, the problem was that they were very computationally intensive and therefore practically impossible to implement. A small research group from the University of Toronto, led by Geoffrey Hinton, continues to work on the concept, but it wasn't until the development of the GPUs that they were able to prove it worked.

Take the stop sign example again. The system will often throw out the wrong answer at the beginning because it takes training. The system probably has to see hundreds of thousands or millions of images before the evaluation has matured enough that the result is always correct.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!Deep learning had its breakthrough with the computer scientist Andrew Ng. He enlarged the neural network, increasing levels and neurons, and then fed a large amount of data into the system to train it. So the “deep” in deep learning stands for the large number of levels. 

Nowadays, image recognition by trained machines is already better than humans in some scenarios. One area of ​​application is the identification of indicators for cancer in the blood or tumors on MRI images. Another, very prominent one, are Teslas self driving cars. Which is at the moment only available in the US as a beta tester, but will be available in the future in more and more countries.

